<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>II: The Episode Called Adhelmar at Puysange</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">II</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">The Episode Called Adhelmar at Puysange</p>
					<p epub:type="subtitle">April 14, 1355⁠—October 23, 1356</p>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:verse" xml:lang="fr">
					<p>
						<span>“D’aquest segle flac, plen de marrimen</span>
						<br/>
						<span>S’amor s’en vai, son jot teinh mensongier.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<div epub:type="z3998:introductory-note">
				<p>So Florian married Sylvie, and made her, they relate, a fair husband, as husbands go. And children came to them, and then old age, and, lastly, that which comes to all.</p>
				<p>Which reminds me that it was an uncomfortable number of years ago, in an out-of-the-way corner of the library at Allonby Shaw, that I first came upon <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Les Aventures d’Adhelmar de Nointel</i>. This manuscript dates from the early part of the fifteenth century and is attributed⁠—though on no very conclusive evidence, says Hinsauf⁠—to the facile pen of Nicolas de Caen (circa 1450), until lately better known as a lyric poet and satirist.</p>
				<p>The story, told in decasyllabic couplets, interspersed after a rather unusual fashion with innumerable lyrics, seems in the main authentic. Sir Adhelmar de Nointel, born about 1332, was once a real and stalwart personage, a younger brother to that Henri de Nointel, the fighting Bishop of Mantes, whose unsavory part in the murder of Jacques van Arteveldt history has recorded at length, and it is with the exploits of this Adhelmar that the romance deals, not, it may be, without exaggeration.</p>
				<p>In any event, the following is, with certain compressions and omissions that have seemed desirable, the last episode of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aventures</i>. The tale concerns the children of Florian and Sylvie: and for it I may claim, at least, the same merit that old Nicolas does at the very outset, since as he veraciously declares⁠—yet with a smack of pride:</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:verse" xml:lang="fr">
					<p>
						<span>Cette bonne ystoire n’est pas usée,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ni guère de lieux jadis trouvée,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ni ècrite par clercz ne fut encore.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
			</div>
			<section id="chapter-2-1" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
					<p epub:type="title">April-Magic</p>
				</header>
				<p>When Adhelmar had ended the tale of Dame Venus and the love which she bore the knight Tannhäuser (here one overtakes Nicolas midcourse in narrative), Adhelmar put away the book and sighed. The Demoiselle Mélite laughed a little⁠—her laughter, as I have told you, was high and delicate, with the resonance of thin glass⁠—and demanded the reason of his sudden grief.</p>
				<p>“I sigh,” he answered, “for sorrow that this Dame Venus is dead.”</p>
				<p>“Surely,” said she, wondering at his glum face, “that is no great matter.”</p>
				<p>“By Saint Vulfran, yes!” Adhelmar protested. “For the same Lady Venus was the fairest of women, as all learned clerks avow, and she is dead these many years, and now there is no woman left alive so beautiful as she⁠—saving one alone, and she will have none of me. And therefore,” he added, very slowly, “I sigh for desire of Dame Venus and for envy of the knight Tannhäuser.”</p>
				<p>Again Mélite laughed, but she forbore⁠—discreetly enough⁠—to question him concerning the lady who was of equal beauty with Dame Venus.</p>
				<p>It was an April morning, and they set in the hedged garden of Puysange. Adhelmar read to her of <i xml:lang="fr">divers</i> ancient queens and of the love-business wherein each took part, relating the histories of the Lady Heleine and of her sweethearting with Duke Paris, the Emperor of Troy’s son, and of the Lady Melior that loved Parthénopex of Blois, and of the Lady Aude, for love of whom Sieur Roland slew the pagan Angoulaffre, and of the Lady Cresseide that betrayed love, and of the Lady Morgaine la Fée, whose Danish lover should yet come from Avalon to save France in her black hour of need. All these he read aloud, suavely, with bland modulations, for he was a man of letters, as letters went in those days. Originally, he had been bred for the Church, but this vocation he had happily forsaken long since, protesting with some show of reason that France at this particular time had a greater need of spears than of <i xml:lang="la">aves</i>.</p>
				<p>For the rest, Sir Adhelmar de Nointel was known as a valiant knight, who had won glory in the wars with the English. He had lodged for a fortnight at Puysange, of which castle the master, Sire Reinault (son to the late Vicomte Florian) was Adhelmar’s cousin: and on the next day Adhelmar proposed to set forth for Paris, where the French King⁠—Jehan the Luckless⁠—was gathering his lieges about him to withstand his kinsman, Edward of England.</p>
				<p>Now, as I have said, Adhelmar was cousin to Reinault, and, in consequence, to Reinault’s sister, the Demoiselle Mélite, and the latter Adhelmar loved, at least, as much as a cousin should. That was well known, and Reinault de Puysange had sworn very heartily that this was a great pity when he affianced her to Hugues d’Arques. Both Hugues and Adhelmar had loved Mélite since boyhood⁠—so far their claims ran equally. But while Adhelmar had busied himself in the acquisition of some scant fame and a vast number of scars, Hugues had sensibly inherited the fief of Arques, a snug property with fertile lands and a stout fortress. How, then, should Reinault hesitate between them?</p>
				<p>He did not. For the Château d’Arques, you must understand, was builded in Lower Normandy, on the fringe of the hill-country, just where the peninsula of Cotentin juts out into the sea, Puysange stood not far north, among the level lands of Upper Normandy: and these two being the strongest castles in those parts, what more natural and desirable than that the families should be united by marriage? Reinault informed his sister of his decision, she wept a little, but did not refuse to comply.</p>
				<p>So Adhelmar, come again to Puysange after five years’ absence, found Mélite troth-plighted, fast and safe, to Hugues. Reinault told him. Adhelmar grumbled and bit his nails in a corner, for a time, then laughed shortly.</p>
				<p>“I have loved Mélite,” he said. “It may be that I love her still. Hah, Saint Vulfran! Why should I not? Why should a man not love his cousin?”</p>
				<p>Adhelmar grinned, while the vicomte twitched his beard and wished Adhelmar at the devil.</p>
				<p>But the young knight stuck fast at Puysange, for all that, and he and Mélite were much together. Daily they made parties to dance, and to hunt the deer, and to fish, but most often to rehearse songs. For Adhelmar made good songs.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></p>
				<p>Today, the summer already stirring in the womb of the year, they sat, as I have said, in the hedged garden, and about them the birds piped and wrangled over their nest-building, and daffodils danced in spring’s honor with lively saltations, and overhead the sky was colored like a robin’s egg. It was very perilous weather for young folk. By reason of this, when he had ended his reading about the lady of the hollow hill, Sir Adhelmar sighed again, and stared at his companion with hungry eyes, wherein desire strained like a hound at the leash.</p>
				<p>Said Mélite, “Was this Lady Venus, then, exceedingly beautiful?”</p>
				<p>Adhelmar swore an oath of sufficient magnitude that she was.</p>
				<p>Whereupon Mélite, twisting her fingers idly and evincing a sudden interest in her own feet, demanded if this Venus were more beautiful than the Lady Ermengarde of Arnaye or the Lady Ysabeau of Brieuc.</p>
				<p>“Holy <i xml:lang="fr">Ouen</i>!” scoffed Adhelmar. “These ladies, while well enough, I grant you, would seem to be callow howlets blinking about that Arabian phoenix which Plinius tells of, in comparison with this Lady Venus that is dead!”</p>
				<p>“But how,” asked Mélite, “was this lady fashioned that you commend so highly?⁠ And how can you know of her beauty who have never seen her?”</p>
				<p>Said Adhelmar: “I have read of her fairness in the chronicles of Messire Stace of Thebes, and of Dares, who was her husband’s bishop. And she was very comely, neither too little nor too big, she was fairer and whiter and more lovely than any flower of the lily or snow upon the branch, but her eyebrows had the mischance of meeting. She had wide-open, beautiful eyes, and her wit was quick and ready. She was graceful and of demure countenance. She was well-beloved, and could herself love well, but her heart was changeable⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Cousin Adhelmar,” declared Mélite, flushing somewhat, for the portrait was like enough, “I think that you tell of a woman, not of a goddess of heathenry.”</p>
				<p>“Her eyes,” said Adhelmar, and his voice shook, and his hands, lifting a little, trembled⁠—“her eyes were large and very bright and of a color like that of the June sunlight falling upon deep waters. Her hair was of a curious gold color like the Fleece that the knight Jason sought, and it curled marvellously about her temples. For mouth she had but a small red wound, and her throat was a tower builded of ivory.”</p>
				<p>But now, still staring at her feet and glowing with the even complexion of a rose, (though not ill-pleased), the Demoiselle Mélite bade him desist and make her a song. Moreover, she added, beauty was but a fleeting thing, and she considered it of little importance, and then she laughed again.</p>
				<p>Adhelmar took up the lute that lay beside them and fingered it for a moment, as though wondering of what he would rhyme. Afterward he sang for her as they sat in the gardens.</p>
				<p>Sang Adhelmar:</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
					<p>
						<span>“It is in vain I mirror forth the praise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In pondered virelais</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of her that is the lady of my love;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Far-sought and curious phrases fail to tell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The tender miracle</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of her white body and the grace thereof.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Thus many and many an artful-artless strain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is fashioned all in vain:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sound proves unsound; and even her name, that is</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To me more glorious than the glow of fire</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or dawn or love’s desire</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or opals interlinked with turquoises,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mocks utterance.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“So, lacking skill to praise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That perfect bodily beauty which is hers,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Even as those worshippers</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who bore rude offerings of honey and maize,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Their all, into the gold-paved ministers</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Aphrodite, I have given her these</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My faltering melodies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That are Love’s lean and ragged messengers.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>When he had ended, Adhelmar cast aside the lute, and caught up both of Mélite’s hands, and strained them to his lips. There needed no wizard to read the message in his eyes.</p>
				<p>Mélite sat silent for a moment. Presently, “Ah, cousin, cousin!” she sighed, “I cannot love you as you would have me love. God alone knows why, true heart, for I revere you as a strong man and a proven knight and a faithful lover, but I do not love you. There are many women who would love you, Adhelmar, for the world praises you, and you have done brave deeds and made good songs and have served your king potently, and yet”⁠—she drew her hands away and laughed a little wearily⁠—“yet I, poor maid, must needs love Hugues, who has done nothing. This love is a strange, unreasoning thing, my cousin.”</p>
				<p>“But do you in truth love Hugues?” asked Adhelmar, in a harsh voice.</p>
				<p>“Yes,” said Mélite, very softly, and afterward flushed and wondered dimly if she had spoken the truth. Then, somehow, her arms clasped about Adhelmar’s neck, and she kissed him, from pure pity, as she told herself, for Mélite’s heart was tender, and she could not endure the anguish in his face.</p>
				<p>This was all very well. But Hugues d’Arques, coming suddenly out of a pleached walk, at this juncture, stumbled upon them and found their postures distasteful. He bent black brows upon the two.</p>
				<p>“Adhelmar,” said he, at length, “this world is a small place.”</p>
				<p>Adhelmar rose. “Indeed,” he assented, with a wried smile, “I think there is scarce room in it for both of us, Hugues.”</p>
				<p>“That was my meaning,” said the Sieur d’Arques.</p>
				<p>“Only,” Adhelmar pursued, somewhat wistfully, “my sword just now, Hugues, is vowed to my king’s quarrel. There are some of us who hope to save France yet, if our blood may avail. In a year, God willing, I shall come again to Puysange, and till then you must wait.”</p>
				<p>Hugues conceded that, perforce, he must wait, since a vow was sacred, and Adhelmar, who suspected Hugues’ natural appetite for battle to be lamentably squeamish, grinned. After that, in a sick rage, Adhelmar struck Hugues in the face, and turned about.</p>
				<p>The Sieur d’Arques rubbed his cheek ruefully. Then he and Mélite stood silent for a moment, and heard Adhelmar in the courtyard calling his men to ride forth, and Mélite laughed, and Hugues scowled.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-2-2" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
					<p epub:type="title">Nicolas as Chorus</p>
				</header>
				<p>The year passed, and Adhelmar did not return, and there was much fighting during that interval, and Hugues began to think the knight was slain and would never return to fight with him. The reflection was borne with equanimity.</p>
				<p>So Adhelmar was half-forgot, and the Sieur d’Arques turned his mind to other matters. He was still a bachelor, for Reinault considered the burden of the times in ill-accord with the chinking of marriage-bells. They were grim times for Frenchmen: right and left the English pillaged and killed and sacked and guzzled and drank, as if they would never have done, and Edward of England began, to subscribe himself <i xml:lang="fr">Rex Franciae</i> with some show of excuse.</p>
				<p>In Normandy men acted according to their natures. Reinault swore lustily and looked to his defences, Hugues, seeing the English everywhere triumphant, drew a long face and doubted, when the will of God was made thus apparent, were it the part of a Christian to withstand it? Then he began to write letters, but to whom no man at either Arques or Puysange knew, saving One-Eyed Peire, who carried them.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-2-3" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
					<p epub:type="title">Treats of Huckstering</p>
				</header>
				<p>It was in the dusk of a rain-sodden October day that Adhelmar rode to the gates of Puysange, with some score men-at-arms behind him. They came from Poictiers, where again the English had conquered, and Adhelmar rode with difficulty, for in that disastrous business in the field of Maupertuis he had been run through the chest, and his wound was scarce healed. Nevertheless, he came to finish his debate with the Sieur d’Arques, wound or no wound.</p>
				<p>But at Puysange he heard a strange tale of Hugues. Reinault, whom Adhelmar found in a fine rage, told the story as they sat over their supper.</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>It had happened, somehow, (Reinault said), that the Marshal Arnold d’Andreghen⁠—newly escaped from prison and with his disposition unameliorated by Lord Audley’s gaolership⁠—had heard of these letters that Hugues wrote so constantly, and the Marshal, being no scholar, had frowned at such doings, and waited presently, with a company of horse, on the road to Arques. Into their midst, on the day before Adhelmar came, rode Peire, the one-eyed messenger, and it was not an unconscionable while before Peire was bound hand and foot, and d’Andreghen was reading the letter they had found in Peire’s jerkin.</p> 
					<p>“Hang the carrier on that oak,” said d’Andreghen, when he had ended, “but leave that largest branch yonder for the writer. For by the Blood of Christ, our common salvation! I will hang him there on Monday!”</p>
					<p>So Peire swung in the air ere long and stuck out a black tongue at the crows, who cawed and waited for supper, and presently they feasted while d’Andreghen rode to Arques, carrying a rope for Hugues.</p>
					<p>For the Marshal, you must understand, was a man of sudden action. Only two months ago, he had taken the Comte de Harcourt with other gentlemen from the Dauphin’s own table to behead them that afternoon in a field behind Rouen. It was true they had planned to resist the <i xml:lang="fr">gabelle</i>, the king’s immemorial right to impose a tax on salt, but Harcourt was Hugues’ cousin, and the Sieur d’Arques, being somewhat of an epicurean disposition, esteemed the dessert accorded his kinsman unpalatable.</p>
					<p>There was no cause for great surprise to d’Andreghen, then, to find that the letter Hugues had written was meant for Edward, the Black Prince of England, now at Bordeaux, where he held the French King, whom the Prince had captured at Poictiers, as a prisoner, for this prince, though he had no particular love for a rogue, yet knew how to make use of one when kingcraft demanded it⁠—and, as he afterward made use of Pedro the Castilian, he was now prepared to make use of Hugues, who hung like a ripe pear ready to drop into Prince Edward’s mouth.</p> 
					<p>“For,” as the Sieur d’Arques pointed out in his letter, “I am by nature inclined to favor you brave English, and so, beyond doubt, is the good God. And I will deliver Arques to you, and thus and thus you may take Normandy and the major portion of France, and thus and thus will I do, and thus and thus must you reward me.”</p>
					<p>Said d’Andreghen, “I will hang him at dawn, and thus and thus may the devil do with his soul!”</p>
					<p>Then with his company d’Andreghen rode to Arques. A herald declared to the men of that place how the matter stood, and bade Hugues come forth and dance upon nothing. The Sieur d’Arques spat curses, like a cat driven into a corner, and wished to fight, but the greater part of his garrison were not willing to do so in such a cause: and so d’Andreghen took him and carried him off.</p>
					<p>In anger having sworn by the Blood of Christ to hang Hugues d’Arques to a certain tree, d’Andreghen had no choice in calm but to abide by his oath. This day being the Sabbath, he deferred the matter, but the Marshal promised to see to it that when morning broke the Sieur d’Arques should dangle side by side with his messenger.</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Thus far the Vicomte de Puysange. He concluded his narrative with a dry chuckle. “And I think we are very well rid of him, Adhelmar. Holy Maclou! That I should have taken the traitor for a true man, though! He would sell France, you observe⁠—chaffered, they tell me, like a peddler over the price of Normandy. Heh, the huckster, the triple-damned Jew!”</p>
				<p>“And Mélite?” asked Adhelmar, after a little.</p>
				<p>Again Reinault shrugged. “In the White Turret,” he said, then, with a short laugh: “<i xml:lang="fr">Oy Dieus</i>, yes! The girl has been caterwauling for this shabby rogue all day. She would have me⁠—me, the king’s man, look you!⁠—save Hugues at the peril of my seignory! And I protest to you, by the most high and pious Saint Nicolas the Confessor,” Reinault swore, “that sooner than see this huckster go unpunished, I would lock Hell’s gate on him with my own hands!”</p>
				<p>For a moment Adhelmar stood with his jaws puffed out, as if in thought, and then he laughed like a wolf. Afterward he went to the White Turret, leaving Reinault smiling over his wine.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-2-4" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
					<p epub:type="title">Folly Diversely Attested</p>
				</header>
				<p>He found Mélite alone. She had robed herself in black, and had gathered her gold hair about her face like a heavy veil, and sat weeping into it for the plight of Hugues d’Arques.</p>
				<p>“Mélite!” cried Adhelmar, “Mélite!”</p>
				<p>The Demoiselle de Puysange rose with a start, and, seeing him standing in the doorway, ran to him, incompetent little hands fluttering before her like frightened doves. She was very tired, by that daylong arguing with her brother’s notions about honor and knightly faith and such foolish matters, and to her weariness Adhelmar seemed strength incarnate, surely he, if anyone, could aid Hugues and bring him safe out of the grim marshal’s claws. For the moment, perhaps, she had forgotten the feud which existed between Adhelmar and the Sieur d’Arques, but in any event, I am convinced, she knew that Adhelmar could refuse her nothing. So she ran toward him, her cheeks flushing arbutus-like, and she was smiling through her tears.</p>
				<p>“Oh,” thought Adhelmar, “were it not very easy to leave Hugues to the dog’s death he merits and to take this woman for my own? For I know that she loves me a little.”</p> 
				<p>And thinking of this, he kissed her, quietly, as one might comfort a sobbing child, afterward he held her in his arms for a moment, wondering vaguely at the pliant thickness of her hair and the sweet scent of it. Then he put her from him gently, and swore in his soul that Hugues must die, so that this woman might be Adhelmar’s.</p>
				<p>“You will save him?” Mélite asked, and raised her face to his. There was that in her eyes which caused Adhelmar to muse for a little on the nature of women’s love, and, subsequently, to laugh harshly and make vehement utterance.</p>
				<p>“Yes!” said Adhelmar.</p>
				<p>He demanded how many of Hugues’ men were about. Some twenty of them had come to Puysange, Mélite said, in the hope that Reinault might aid them to save their master. She protested that her brother was a coward for not doing so, but Adhelmar, having his own opinion on this subject, and thinking in his heart that Hugues’ skin might easily be ripped off him without spilling a pint of honest blood, said, simply: “Twenty and twenty is twoscore. It is not a large armament, but it may serve.”</p>
				<p>He told her his plan was to fall suddenly upon d’Andreghen and his men that night, and in the tumult to steal Hugues away, whereafter, as Adhelmar pointed out, Hugues might readily take ship for England, and leave the marshal to blaspheme Fortune in Normandy, and the French King to gnaw at his chains in Bordeaux, while Hugues toasts his shins in comfort at London. Adhelmar admitted that the plan was a mad one, but added, reasonably enough, that needs must when the devil drives. And so firm was his confidence, so cheery his laugh⁠—he managed to laugh somehow, though it was a stiff piece of work⁠—that Mélite began to be comforted somewhat, and bade him go and Godspeed.</p>
				<p>So then Adhelmar left her. In the main hall he found the vicomte still sitting over his wine of Anjou.</p>
				<p>“Cousin,” said Adhelmar, “I must ride hence tonight.”</p>
				<p>Reinault stared at him: a mastering wonder woke in Reinault’s face. “Ta, ta, ta!” he clicked his tongue, very softly. Afterward he sprang to his feet and clutched Adhelmar by both arms. “No, no!” Reinault cried. “No, Adhelmar, you must not try that! It is death, lad⁠—sure death! It means hanging, boy!” the vicomte pleaded, for, hard man that he was, he loved Adhelmar.</p>
				<p>“That is likely enough,” Adhelmar conceded.</p>
				<p>“They will hang you,” Reinault said again: “d’Andreghen and the Count Dauphin of Vienna will hang you as blithely as they would Iscariot.”</p>
				<p>“That, too,” said Adhelmar, “is likely enough, if I remain in France.”</p>
				<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Oy Dieus!</i> Will you flee to England, then?” the vicomte scoffed, bitterly. “Has King Edward not sworn to hang you these eight years past? Was it not you, then, cousin, who took Almerigo di Pavia, that Lombard knave whom he made governor of Calais⁠—was it not you, then, who delivered Edward’s loved Almerigo to Geoffrey de Chargny, who had him broken on the wheel? Eh, holy Maclou! but you will get hearty welcome and a chaplain and a rope in England.”</p>
				<p>Adhelmar admitted that this was true. “Still,” said he, “I must ride hence tonight.”</p>
				<p>“For her?” Reinault asked, and jerked his thumb upward.</p>
				<p>“Yes,” said Adhelmar, “for her.”</p>
				<p>Reinault stared in his face for a while. “You are a fool, Adhelmar,” said he, at last, “but you are a brave man, and you love as becomes a chevalier. It is a great pity that a flibbertigibbet wench with a towhead should be the death of you. For my part, I am the king’s vassal, I shall not break faith with him, but you are my guest and my kinsman. For that reason I am going to bed, and I shall sleep very soundly. It is likely I shall hear nothing of the night’s doings⁠—<i xml:lang="it">ohimé</i>, no! Not if you murder d’Andreghen in the courtyard!” Reinault ended, and smiled, somewhat sadly.</p>
				<p>Afterward he took Adhelmar’s hand and said: “Farewell, lord Adhelmar! O true knight, sturdy and bold! Terrible and merciless toward your enemies, gentle and simple toward your friends, farewell!”</p>
				<p>He kissed Adhelmar on either cheek and left him. In those days men encountered death with very little ado.</p>
				<p>Then Adhelmar rode off in the rain with thirty-four armed followers. Riding thus, he reflected upon the nature of women and upon his love for the Demoiselle de Puysange, and, to himself, he swore gloomily that if she had a mind to Hugues she must have Hugues, come what might. Having reached this conclusion, Adhelmar wheeled upon his men, and cursed them for tavern-idlers and laggards and flea-hearted snails, and bade them spur.</p>
				<p>Mélite, at her window, heard them depart, and heard the noise of their going lapse into the bland monotony of the rain’s noise. This dank night now divulged no more, and she turned back into the room. Adhelmar’s glove, which he had forgotten in his haste, lay upon the floor, and Mélite lifted it and twisted it idly.</p>
				<p>“I wonder⁠—?” said she.</p>
				<p>She lighted four wax candles and set them before a mirror that was in the room. Mélite stood among them and looked into the mirror. She seemed very tall and very slender, and her loosened hair hung heavily about her beautiful shallow face and fell like a cloak around her black-robed body, showing against the black gown like melting gold, and about her were the tall, white candles tipped with still flames of gold. Mélite laughed⁠—her laughter was high and delicate, with the resonance of thin glass⁠—and raised her arms above her, head, stretching tensely like a cat before a fire, and laughed yet again.</p>
				<p>“After all,” said she, “I do not wonder.”</p>
				<p>Mélite sat before the mirror, and braided her hair, and sang to herself in a sweet, low voice, brooding with unfathomable eyes upon her image in the glass, while the October rain beat about Puysange, and Adhelmar rode forth to save Hugues that must else be hanged.</p>
				<p>Sang Mélite:</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
					<p>
						<span>“Rustling leaves of the willow-tree</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Peering downward at you and me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And no man else in the world to see,</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Only the birds, whose dusty coats</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Show dark in the green⁠—whose throbbing throats</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Turn joy to music and love to notes.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Lean your body against the tree,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lifting your red lips up to me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mélite, and kiss, with no man to see!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“And let us laugh for a little:⁠—Yea,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let love and laughter herald the day</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When laughter and love will be put away.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Then you will remember the willow-tree</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And this very hour, and remember me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mélite⁠—whose face you will no more see!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“So swift, so swift the glad time goes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Eld and Death with their countless woes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Draw near, and the end thereof no man knows,</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Lean your body against the tree,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lifting your red lips up to me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mélite, and kiss, with no man to see!”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Mélite smiled as she sang, for this was a song that Adhelmar had made for her upon a May morning at Nointel, before he was a knight, when both were very young. So now she smiled to remember the making of the verses which she sang while the October rain was beating about Puysange.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-2-5" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
					<p epub:type="title">Night-Work</p>
				</header>
				<p>It was not long before they came upon d’Andreghen and his men camped about a great oak, with One-Eyed Peire a-swing over their heads for a lamentable banner. A shrill sentinel, somewhere in the dark, demanded the newcomers’ business, but without receiving any adequate answer, for at that moment Adhelmar gave the word to charge.</p>
				<p>Then it was as if all the devils in Pandemonium had chosen Normandy for their playground, and what took place in the night no man saw for the darkness, so that I cannot tell you of it. Let it suffice that Adhelmar rode away before d’Andreghen had rubbed sleep well out of his eyes, and with Adhelmar were Hugues d’Arques and some half of Adhelmar’s men. The rest were dead, and Adhelmar was badly hurt, for he had burst open his old wound and it was bleeding under his armor. Of this he said nothing.</p>
				<p>“Hugues,” said he, “do you and these fellows ride to the coast, thence take ship for England.”</p>
				<p>He would have none of Hugues’ thanks, instead, he turned and left Hugues to whimper out his gratitude to the skies, which spat a warm, gusty rain at him. Adhelmar rode again to Puysange, and as he went he sang.</p>
				<p>Sang Adhelmar:</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
					<p>
						<span>“D’Andreghen in Normandy</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Went forth to slay mine enemy;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But as he went</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lord God for me wrought marvellously;</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Wherefore, I may call and cry</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That am now about to die,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>‘I am content!’</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“<i xml:lang="la">Domine! Domine!</i></span>
						<br/>
						<span><i xml:lang="la">Gratias accipe!</i></span>
						<br/>
						<br/>
						<span><i xml:lang="la">Et meum animum</i></span>
						<br/>
						<br/>
						<span><i xml:lang="la">Recipe in coelum!</i>”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-2-6" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
					<p epub:type="title">They Kiss at Parting</p>
				</header>
				<p>When he had come to Puysange, Adhelmar climbed the stairs of the White Turret⁠—slowly, for he was growing very feeble now⁠—and so came again to Mélite crouching among the burned-out candles in the slate-colored twilight which heralded dawn.</p>
				<p>“He is safe,” said Adhelmar. He told Mélite how Hugues was rescued and shipped to England, and how, if she would, she might straightway follow him in a fishing-boat. “For there is likely to be ugly work at Puysange,” Adhelmar said, “when the marshal comes. And he will come.”</p>
				<p>“But what will you do now, my cousin?” asked Mélite.</p>
				<p>“Holy <i xml:lang="fr">Ouen</i>!” said Adhelmar, “Since I needs must die, I will die in France, not in the cold land of England.”</p>
				<p>“Die!” cried Mélite. “Are you hurt so sorely, then?”</p>
				<p>He grinned like a death’s-head. “My injuries are not incurable,” said he, “yet must I die very quickly, for all that. The English King will hang me if I go thither, as he has sworn to do these eight years, because of that matter of Almerigo di Pavia: and if I stay in France, I must hang because of this night’s work.”</p>
				<p>Mélite wept. “O God! O God!” she quavered, two or three times, like one hurt in the throat. “And you have done this for me! Is there no way to save you, Adhelmar?” she pleaded, with wide, frightened eyes that were like a child’s.</p>
				<p>“None,” said Adhelmar. He took both her hands in his, very tenderly. “Ah, my sweet,” said he, “must I, whose grave is already digged, waste breath upon this idle talk of kingdoms and the squabbling men who rule them? I have but a brief while to live, and I wish to forget that there is aught else in the world save you, and that I love you. Do not weep, Mélite! In a little time you will forget me and be happy with this Hugues whom you love, and I? Ah, my sweet, I think that even in my grave I shall dream of you and of your great beauty and of the exceeding love that I bore you in the old days.”</p>
				<p>“Ah, no, I shall not ever forget, O true and faithful lover! And, indeed, indeed, Adhelmar, I would give my life right willingly that yours might be saved!”</p>
				<p>She had almost forgotten Hugues. Her heart was sad as she thought of Adhelmar, who must die a shameful death for her sake, and of the love which she had cast away. Beside it, the Sieur d’Arques’ affection showed somewhat tawdry, and Mélite began to reflect that, after all, she had liked Adhelmar almost as well.</p>
				<p>“Sweet,” said Adhelmar, “do I not know you to the marrow? You will forget me utterly, for your heart is very changeable. Ah, Mother of God!” Adhelmar cried, with a quick lift of speech, “I am afraid to die, for the harsh dust will shut out the glory of your face, and you will forget!”</p>
				<p>“No, ah, no!” Mélite whispered, and drew near to him. Adhelmar smiled, a little wistfully, for he did not believe that she spoke the truth, but it was good to feel her body close to his, even though he was dying, and he was content.</p>
				<p>But by this time the dawn had come completely, flooding the room with its first thin radiance, and Mélite saw the pallor of his face and so knew that he was wounded.</p>
				<p>“Indeed, yes,” said Adhelmar, when she had questioned him, “for my breast is quite cloven through.” And when she disarmed him, Mélite found a great cut in his chest which had bled so much that it was apparent he must die, whether d’Andreghen and Edward of England would or no.</p>
				<p>Mélite wept again, and cried, “Why had you not told me of this?”</p>
				<p>“To have you heal me, perchance?” said Adhelmar. “Ah, love, is hanging, then, so sweet a death that I should choose it, rather than to die very peacefully in your arms? Indeed, I would not live if I might, for I have proven traitor to my king, and it is right that traitors should die, and, chief of all, I know that life can bring me naught more desirable than I have known this night. What need, then, have I to live?”</p>
				<p>Mélite bent over him, for as he spoke he had lain back in a tall carven chair by the east window. She was past speech. But now, for a moment, her lips clung to his, and her warm tears fell upon his face.</p> 
				<p>“What better death for a lover?” thought Adhelmar.</p>
				<p>Yet he murmured somewhat. “Pity, always pity!” he said, wearily. “I shall never win aught else of you, Mélite. For before this you have kissed me, pitying me because you could not love me. And you have kissed me now, pitying me because I may not live.”</p>
				<p>But Mélite, clasping her arms about his neck, whispered into his ear the meaning of this last kiss, and at the honeyed sound of her whispering his strength came back for a moment, and he strove to rise. The level sunlight through the open window smote full upon his face, which was very glad. Mélite was conscious of her nobility in causing him such delight at the last.</p>
				<p>“God, God!” cried Adhelmar, and he spread out his arms toward the dear, familiar world that was slowly taking form beneath them⁠—a world now infinitely dear to him, “all, my God, have pity and let me live a little longer!”</p>
				<p>As Mélite, half frightened, drew back from him, he crept out of his chair and fell prone at her feet. Afterward his hands stretched forward toward her, clutching, and then trembled and were still.</p>
				<p>Mélite stood looking downward, wondering vaguely when she would next know either joy or sorrow again. She was now conscious of no emotion whatever. It seemed to her she ought to be more greatly moved. So the new day found them.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
