<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VI: The Episode Called the Conspiracy of Arnaye</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">The Episode Called the Conspiracy of Arnaye</p>
					<p epub:type="subtitle">July 17, 1484</p>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:drama" xml:lang="fr">
					<p>“Et puis il se rencontre icy une avanture merveilleuse, c’est que le fils de Grand Turc ressemble à Cléonte, à peu de chose prés.”</p>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<div epub:type="z3998:introductory-note">
				<p>Noël d’Arnaye and Catherine de Vaucelles were married in the September of 1462, and afterward withdrew to Noël’s fief in Picardy. There Noël built him a new Château d’Arnaye, and through the influence of Nicole Beaupertuys, the King’s mistress, (who was rumored in court byways to have a tenderness for the handsome Noël), obtained large grants for its maintenance. Madame d’Arnaye, also, it is gratifying to record, appears to have lived in tolerable amity with Sieur Noël, and neither of them pried too closely into the other’s friendships.</p>
				<p>Catherine died in 1470, and Noël outlived her but by three years. Of the six acknowledged children surviving him, only one was legitimate⁠—a daughter called Matthiette. The estate and title thus reverted to Raymond d’Arnaye, Noël’s younger brother, from whom the present family of Arnaye is descended.</p>
				<p>Raymond was a far shrewder man than his predecessor. For ten years’ space, while Louis <span epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XI</span>, that royal fox of France, was destroying feudalism piecemeal⁠—trimming its power day by day as you might pare an onion⁠—the new Sieur d’Arnaye steered his shifty course between France and Burgundy, always to the betterment of his chances in this world however he may have modified them in the next. At Arras he fought beneath the orifiamme; at Guinegate you could not have found a more staunch Burgundian: though he was no warrior, victory followed him like a lapdog. So that presently the Sieur d’Arnaye and the Vicomte de Puysange⁠—with which family we have previously concerned ourselves⁠—were the great lords of Northern France.</p>
				<p>But after the old King’s death came gusty times for Sieur Raymond. It is with them we have here to do.</p>
			</div>
			<section id="chapter-6-1" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
					<p epub:type="title">Policy Tempered with Singing</p>
				</header>
				<p>“And so,” said the Sieur d’Arnaye, as he laid down the letter, “we may look for the coming of Monsieur de Puysange tomorrow.”</p>
				<p>The Demoiselle Matthiette contorted her features in an expression of disapproval. “So soon!” said she. “I had thought⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Ouais, my dear niece, Love rides by ordinary with a dripping spur, and is still as arbitrary as in the day when Mars was taken with a net and amorous Jove bellowed in Europa’s kail-yard. My faith! if Love distemper thus the spectral ichor of the gods, is it remarkable that the warmer blood of man pulses rather vehemently at his bidding? It were the least of Cupid’s miracles that a lusty bridegroom of some twenty-and-odd should be pricked to outstrip the dial by a scant week. For love⁠—I might tell you such tales⁠—”</p>
				<p>Sieur Raymond crossed his white, dimpled hands over a well-rounded paunch and chuckled reminiscently; had he spoken doubtless he would have left Master Jehan de Troyes very little to reveal in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Scandalous Chronicle</i>: but now, as if now recalling with whom Sieur Raymond conversed, d’Arnaye’s lean face assumed an expression of placid sanctity, and the somewhat unholy flame died out of his green eyes. He was like no other thing than a plethoric cat purring over the follies of kittenhood. You would have taken oath that a cultured taste for good living was the chief of his offences, and that this benevolent gentleman had some sixty well-spent years to his credit. True, his late Majesty, King Louis <span epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XI</span>, had sworn <i xml:lang="fr">Pacque Dieu</i>! that d’Arnaye loved underhanded work so heartily that he conspired with his gardener concerning the planting of cabbages, and within a week after his death would be heading some treachery against Lucifer; but kings are not always infallible, as his Majesty himself had proven at Peronne.</p>
				<p>“⁠—For,” said the Sieur d’Arnaye, “man’s flesh is frail, and the devil is very cunning to avail himself of the weaknesses of lovers.”</p>
				<p>“Love!” Matthiette cried. “Ah, do not mock me, my uncle! There can be no pretence of love between Monsieur de Puysange and me. A man that I have never seen, that is to wed me of pure policy, may look for no Alcestis in his wife.”</p>
				<p>“You speak like a very sensible girl,” said Sieur Raymond, complacently. “However, so that he find her no Guinevere or Semiramis or other loose-minded trollop of history, I dare say Monsieur de Puysange will hold to his bargain with indifferent content. Look you, niece, he, also, is buying⁠—though the saying is somewhat rustic⁠—a pig in a poke.”</p>
				<p>Matthiette glanced quickly toward the mirror which hung in her apartment. The glass reflected features which went to make up a beauty already be-sonneted in that part of France; and if her green gown was some months behind the last Italian fashion, it undeniably clad one who needed few adventitious aids. The Demoiselle Matthiette at seventeen was very tall, and was as yet too slender for perfection of form, but her honey-colored hair hung heavily about the unblemished oval of a countenance whose nose alone left something to be desired; for this feature, though well shaped, was unduly diminutive. For the rest, her mouth curved in an irreproachable bow, her complexion was mingled milk and roses, her blue eyes brooded in a provoking calm; taking matters by and large, the smile that followed her inspection of the mirror’s depths was far from unwarranted. Catherine de Vaucelles reanimate, you would have sworn; and at the abbey of Saint Maixent-en-Poitou there was a potbelly monk, a Brother François, who would have demonstrated it to you, in an unanswerable ballad, that Catherine’s daughter was in consequence all that an empress should be and so rarely is. Harembourges and Bertha Broadfoot and white Queen Blanche would have been laughed to scorn, demolished and proven, in comparison (with a catalogue of very intimate personal detail), the squalidest sluts conceivable, by Brother François.</p>
				<p>But Sieur Raymond merely chuckled wheezily, as one discovering a fault in his companion of which he disapproves in theory, but in practice finds flattering to his vanity.</p>
				<p>“I grant you, Monsieur de Puysange drives a good bargain,” said Sieur Raymond. “Were Cleopatra thus featured, the Roman lost the world very worthily. Yet, such is the fantastic disposition of man that I do not doubt the vicomte looks forward to the joys of tomorrow no whit more cheerfully than you do: for the lad is young, and, as rumor says, has been guilty of <i xml:lang="fr">divers</i> verses⁠—ay, he has bearded commonsense in the vext periods of many a wailing rhyme. I will wager a moderate amount, however, that the vicomte, like a sensible young man, keeps these whimsies of flames and dames laid away in lavender for festivals and the like; they are somewhat too fine for everyday wear.”</p>
				<p>Sieur Raymond sipped the sugared wine which stood beside him. “Like any sensible young man,” he repeated, in a meditative fashion that was half a query.</p>
				<p>Matthiette stirred uneasily. “Is love, then, nothing?” she murmured.</p>
				<p>“Love!” Sieur Raymond barked like a kicked mastiff. “It is very discreetly fabled that love was brought forth at Cythera by the ocean fogs. Thus, look you, even ballad-mongers admit it comes of a short-lived family, that fade as time wears on. I may have a passion for cloud-tatters, and, doubtless, the morning mists are beautiful; but if I give rein to my admiration, breakfast is likely to grow cold. I deduce that beauty, as represented by the sunrise, is less profitably considered than utility, as personified by the frying-pan. And love! A niece of mine prating of love!” The idea of such an occurrence, combined with a fit of coughing which now came upon him, drew tears to the Sieur d’Arnaye’s eyes. “Pardon me,” said he, when he had recovered his breath, “if I speak somewhat brutally to maiden ears.”</p>
				<p>Matthiette sighed. “Indeed,” said she, “you have spoken very brutally!” She rose from her seat, and went to the Sieur d’Arnaye. “Dear uncle,” said she, with her arms about his neck, and with her soft cheek brushing his withered countenance, “are you come to my apartments tonight to tell me that love is nothing⁠—you who have shown me that even the roughest, most grizzled bear in all the world has a heart compact of love and tender as a woman’s?”</p>
				<p>The Sieur d’Arnaye snorted. “Her mother all over again!” he complained; and then, recovering himself, shook his head with a hint of sadness.</p>
				<p>He said: “I have sighed to every eyebrow at court, and I tell you this moonshine is⁠—moonshine pure and simple. Matthiette, I love you too dearly to deceive you in, at all events, this matter, and I have learned by hard knocks that we of gentle quality may not lightly follow our own inclinations. Happiness is a luxury which the great can very rarely afford. Granted that you have an aversion to this marriage. Yet consider this: Arnaye and Puysange united may sit snug and let the world wag; otherwise, lying here between the Breton and the Austrian, we are so many nuts in a door-crack, at the next wind’s mercy. And yonder in the South, Orleans and Dunois are raising every devil in Hell’s register! Ah, no, ma mie; I put it to you fairly is it of greater import that a girl have her callow heart’s desire than that a province go free of Monsieur War and Madame Rapine?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, but⁠—” said Matthiette.</p>
				<p>Sieur Raymond struck his hand upon the table with considerable heat. “Everywhere Death yawps at the frontier; will you, a d’Arnaye, bid him enter and surfeit? An alliance with Puysange alone may save us. Eheu, it is, doubtless, pitiful that a maid may not wait and wed her chosen paladin, but our vassals demand these sacrifices. For example, do you think I wedded my late wife in any fervor of adoration? I had never seen her before our marriage day; yet we lived much as most couples do for some ten years afterward, thereby demonstrating⁠—”</p>
				<p>He smiled, evilly; Matthiette sighed.</p>
				<p>“⁠—Well, thereby demonstrating nothing new,” said Sieur Raymond. “So do you remember that Pierre must have his bread and cheese; that the cows must calve undisturbed; that the pigs⁠—you have not seen the sow I had today from Harfleur?⁠—black as ebony and a snout like a rose-leaf!⁠—must be stied in comfort: and that these things may not be, without an alliance with Puysange. Besides, dear niece, it is something to be the wife of a great lord.”</p>
				<p>A certain excitement awoke in Matthiette’s eyes. “It must be very beautiful at Court,” said she, softly. “Masques, <span xml:lang="fr">fêtes</span>, tourneys every day;⁠—and they say the new King is exceedingly gallant⁠—”</p>
				<p>Sieur Raymond caught her by the chin, and for a moment turned her face toward his. “I warn you,” said he, “you are a d’Arnaye; and King or not⁠—”</p>
				<p>He paused here. Through the open window came the voice of one singing to the demure accompaniment of a lute.</p>
				<p>“Hey?” said the Sieur d’Arnaye.</p>
				<p>Sang the voice:</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
					<p>
						<span>“When you are very old, and I am gone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not to return, it may be you will say⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hearing my name and holding me as one</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Long dead to you⁠—in some half-jesting way</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of speech, sweet as vague heraldings of May</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rumored in woods when first the throstles sing⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>‘He loved me once.’ And straightway murmuring</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My half-forgotten rhymes, you will regret</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Evanished times when I was wont to sing</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So very lightly, ‘Love runs into debt.’”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>“Now, may I never sit among the saints,” said the Sieur d’Arnaye, “if that is not the voice of Raoul de Prison, my new page.”</p>
				<p>“Hush,” Matthiette whispered. “He woos my maid, Alys. He often sings under the window, and I wink at it.”</p>
				<p>Sang the voice:</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
					<p>
						<span>“I shall not heed you then. My course being run</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For good or ill, I shall have gone my way,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And know you, love, no longer⁠—nor the sun,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Perchance, nor any light of earthly day,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor any joy nor sorrow⁠—while at play</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The world speeds merrily, nor reckoning</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our coming or our going. Lips will cling,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forswear, and be forsaken, and men forget</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where once our tombs were, and our children sing⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So very lightly!⁠—‘Love runs into debt.’</span>
						
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“If in the grave love have dominion</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will that wild cry not quicken the wise clay,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And taunt with memories of fond deeds undone⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Some joy untasted, some lost holiday⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All death’s large wisdom? Will that wisdom lay</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The ghost of any sweet familiar thing</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Come haggard from the Past, or ever bring</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forgetfulness of those two lovers met</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When all was April?⁠—nor too wise to sing</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So very lightly, ‘Love runs into debt.’</span>
						
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Yet, Matthiette, though vain remembering</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Draw nigh, and age be drear, yet in the spring</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We meet and kiss, whatever hour beset</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wherein all hours attain to harvesting⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So very lightly love runs into debt.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>“Dear, dear!” said the Sieur d’Arnaye. “You mentioned your maid’s name, I think?”</p>
				<p>“Alys,” said Matthiette, with unwonted humbleness.</p>
				<p>Sieur Raymond spread out his hands in a gesture of commiseration. “This is very remarkable,” he said. “Beyond doubt, the gallant beneath has made some unfortunate error. Captain Gotiard,” he called, loudly, “will you ascertain who it is that warbles in the garden such queer aliases for our good Alys?”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-6-2" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
					<p epub:type="title">Age Glosses the Text of Youth</p>
				</header>
				<p>Gotiard was not long in returning; he was followed by two men-at-arms, who held between them the discomfited minstrel. Envy alone could have described the lutanist as ill-favored; his close-fitting garb, wherein the brave reds of autumn were judiciously mingled, at once set off a well-knit form and enhanced the dark comeliness of features less French than Italian in cast. The young man now stood silent, his eyes mutely questioning the Sieur d’Arnaye.</p>
				<p>“Oh, la, la, la!” chirped Sieur Raymond. “Captain, I think you are at liberty to retire.” He sipped his wine meditatively, as the men filed out. “Monsieur de Frison,” d’Arnaye resumed, when the arras had fallen, “believe me, I grieve to interrupt your very moving and most excellently phrased ballad in this fashion. But the hour is somewhat late for melody, and the curiosity of old age is privileged. May one inquire, therefore, why you outsing my larks and linnets and other musical poultry that are now all abed? and warble them to rest with this pleasing but⁠—if I may venture a suggestion⁠—rather ill-timed madrigal?”</p>
				<p>The young man hesitated for an instant before replying. “Sir,” said he, at length, “I confess that had I known of your whereabouts, the birds had gone without their lullaby. But you so rarely come to this wing of the château, that your presence here tonight is naturally unforeseen. As it is, since chance has betrayed my secret to you, I must make bold to acknowledge it; and to confess that I love your niece.”</p>
				<p>“Hey, no doubt you do,” Sieur Raymond assented, pleasantly. “Indeed, I think half the young men hereabout are in much the same predicament. But, my question, if I mistake not, related to your reason for chanting canzonets beneath her window.”</p>
				<p>Raoul de Frison stared at him in amazement. “I love her,” he said.</p>
				<p>“You mentioned that before,” Sieur Raymond suggested. “And I agreed, as I remember, that it was more than probable; for my niece here⁠—though it be I that speak it⁠—is by no means uncomely, has a commendable voice, the walk of a Hebe, and sufficient wit to deceive her lover into happiness. My faith, young man, you show excellent taste! But, I submit, the purest affection is an insufficient excuse for outbaying a whole kennel of hounds beneath the adored one’s casement.”</p>
				<p>“Sir,” said Raoul, “I believe that lovers have rarely been remarkable for sanity; and it is an immemorial custom among them to praise the object of their desires with fitting rhymes. Conceive, sir, that in your youth, had you been accorded the love of so fair a lady, you yourself had scarcely done otherwise. For I doubt if your blood runs so thin as yet that you have quite forgot young Raymond d’Arnaye and the gracious ladies whom he loved⁠—I think that your heart must needs yet treasure the memories of <i xml:lang="fr">divers</i> moonlit nights, even such as this, when there was a great silence in the world, and the nested trees were astir with desire of the dawn, and your waking dreams were vext with the singular favor of some woman’s face. It is in the name of that young Raymond I now appeal to you.”</p>
				<p>“H’m!” said the Sieur d’Arnaye. “As I understand it, you appeal on the ground that you were coerced by the moonlight and led astray by the bird-nests in my poplar-trees; and you desire me to punish your accomplices rather than you.”</p>
				<p>“Sir⁠—” said Raoul.</p>
				<p>Sieur Raymond snarled. “You young dog, you know that in the most prosaic breast a minor poet survives his entombment⁠—and you endeavor to make capital of the knowledge. You know that I have a most sincere affection for your father, and have even contracted since you came to Arnaye more or less tolerance for you⁠—which emboldens you, my friend, to keep me out of a comfortable bed at this hour of the night with an idiotic discourse of moonlight and dissatisfied shrubbery! As it happens, I am not a lank wench in her first country dance. Remember that, Raoul de Frison, and praise the good God who gave me at birth a very placable disposition! There is not a seigneur in all France, save me, but would hang you at the crack of that same dawn for which you report your lackadaisical trees to be whining; but the quarrel will soon be Monsieur de Puysange’s, and I prefer that he settle it at his own discretion. I content myself with advising you to pester my niece no more.”</p>
				<p>Raoul spoke boldly. “She loves me,” said he, standing very erect.</p>
				<p>Sieur Raymond glanced at Matthiette, who sat with downcast head. “H’m!” said he. “She moderates her transports indifferently well. Though, again, why not? You are not an ill-looking lad. Indeed, Monsieur de Frison, I am quite ready to admit that my niece is breaking her heart for you. The point on which I wish to dwell is that she weds Monsieur de Puysange early tomorrow morning.”</p>
				<p>“Uncle,” Matthiette cried, as she started to her feet, “such a marriage is a crime! I love Raoul!”</p>
				<p>“Undoubtedly,” purred Sieur Raymond, “you love the lad unboundedly, madly, distractedly! Now we come to the root of the matter.” He sank back in his chair and smiled. “Young people,” said he, “be seated, and hearken to the words of wisdom. Love is a divine insanity, in which the sufferer fancies the world mad. And the world is made up of madmen who condemn and punish one another.”</p>
				<p>“But,” Matthiette dissented, “ours is no ordinary case!”</p>
				<p>“Surely not,” Sieur Raymond readily agreed; “for there was never an ordinary case in all the history of the universe. Oh, but I, too, have known this madness; I, too, have perceived how infinitely my own skirmishes with the blind bow-god differed in every respect from all that has been or will ever be. It is an infallible sign of this frenzy. Surely, I have said, the world will not willingly forget the vision of Chloris in her wedding garments, or the wonder of her last clinging kiss. Or, say Phyllis comes tomorrow: will an uninventive sun dare to rise in the old, hackneyed fashion on such a day of days? Perish the thought! There will probably be six suns, and, I dare say, a meteor or two.”</p>
				<p>“I perceive, sir,” Raoul said here, “that after all you have not forgotten the young Raymond of whom I spoke.”</p>
				<p>“That was a long while ago,” snapped Sieur Raymond. “I know a deal more of the world nowadays; and a levelheaded world would be somewhat surprised at such occurrences, and suggest that for the future Phyllis remain at home. For whether you⁠—or I⁠—or anyone⁠—be in love or no is to our fellow creatures an affair of astonishingly trivial import. Not since Noé that great admiral, repeopled the world by begetting three sons upon Dame Noria has there been a love-business worthy of consideration; nor, if you come to that, not since sagacious Solomon went a-wenching has a wise man wasted his wisdom on a lover. So love one another, my children, by all means: but do you, Matthiette, make ready to depart into Normandy as a true and faithful wife to Monsieur de Puysange; and do you, Raoul de Prison, remain at Arnaye, and attend to my falcons more carefully than you have done of late⁠—or, by the cross of Saint Lo! I will clap the wench in a convent and hang the lad as high as Haman!”</p>
				<p>Whereon Sieur Raymond smiled pleasantly, and drained his wine-cup as one considering the discussion ended.</p>
				<p>Raoul sat silent for a moment. Then he rose. “Monsieur d’Arnaye, you know me to be a gentleman of unblemished descent, and as such entitled to a hearing. I forbid you before all-seeing Heaven to wed your niece to a man she does not love! And I have the honor to request of you her hand in marriage.”</p>
				<p>“Which offer I decline,” said Sieur Raymond, grinning placidly⁠—“with every imaginable civility. Niece,” he continued, “here is a gentleman who offers you a heartful of love, six months of insanity, and forty years of boredom in a leaky, windswept château. He has dreamed dreams concerning you: allow me to present to you the reality.”</p>
				<p>With some ceremony Sieur Raymond now grasped Matthiette’s hand and led her mirror-ward. “Permit me to present the wife of Monsieur de Puysange. Could he have made a worthier choice? Ah, happy lord, that shall so soon embrace such perfect loveliness! For, frankly, my niece, is not that golden hair of a shade that will set off a coronet extraordinarily well? Are those wondrous eyes not fashioned to surfeit themselves upon the homage and respect accorded the wife of a great lord? <i xml:lang="fr">Ouais</i>, the thing is indisputable: and, therefore, I must differ from Monsieur de Frison here, who would condemn this perfection to bloom and bud unnoticed in a paltry country town.”</p>
				<p>There was an interval, during which Matthiette gazed sadly into the mirror. “And Arnaye⁠—?” said she.</p>
				<p>“Undoubtedly,” said Sieur Raymond⁠—“Arnaye must perish unless Puysange prove her friend. Therefore, my niece conquers her natural aversion to a young and wealthy husband, and a life of comfort and flattery and gayety; relinquishes you, Raoul; and, like a feminine Mettius Curtius, sacrifices herself to her country’s welfare. Pierre may sleep undisturbed; and the pigs will have a new sty. My faith, it is quite affecting! And so,” Sieur Raymond summed it up, “you two young fools may bid adieu, once for all, while I contemplate this tapestry.” He strolled to the end of the room and turned his back. “Admirable!” said he; “really now, that leopard is astonishingly lifelike!”</p>
				<p>Raoul came toward Matthiette. “Dear love,” said he, “you have chosen wisely, and I bow to your decision. Farewell, Matthiette⁠—O indomitable heart! O brave perfect woman that I have loved! Now at the last of all, I praise you for your charity to me, Love’s mendicant⁠—ah, believe me, Matthiette, that atones for aught which follows now. Come what may, I shall always remember that once in old days you loved me, and, remembering this, I shall always thank God with a contented heart.” He bowed over her unresponsive hand. “Matthiette,” he whispered, “be happy! For I desire that very heartily, and I beseech of our Sovereign Lady⁠—not caring to hide at all how my voice shakes, nor how the loveliness of you, seen now for the last time, is making blind my eyes⁠—that you may never know unhappiness. You have chosen wisely, Matthiette; yet, ah, my dear, do not forget me utterly, but keep always a little place in your heart for your boy lover!”</p>
				<p>Sieur Raymond concluded his inspection of the tapestry, and turned with a premonitory cough. “Thus ends the comedy,” said he, shrugging, “with much fine, harmless talking about ‘always,’ while the world triumphs. Invariably the world triumphs, my children. Eheu, we are as God made us, we men and women that cumber His stately earth!” He drew his arm through Raoul’s. “Farewell, niece,” said Sieur Raymond, smiling; “I rejoice that you are cured of your malady. Now in respect to gerfalcons⁠—” said he. The arras fell behind them.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-6-3" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
					<p epub:type="title">Obdurate Love</p>
				</header>
				<p>Matthiette sat brooding in her room, as the night wore on. She was pitifully frightened, numb. There was in the room, she dimly noted, a heavy silence that sobs had no power to shatter. Dimly, too, she seemed aware of a multitude of wide, incurious eyes which watched her from every corner, where panels snapped at times with sharp echoes. The night was well-nigh done when she arose.</p>
				<p>“After all,” she said, wearily, “it is my manifest duty.” Matthiette crept to the mirror and studied it.</p>
				<p>“Madame de Puysange,” said she, without any intonation; then threw her arms above her head, with a hard gesture of despair. “I love him!” she cried, in a frightened voice.</p>
				<p>Matthiette went to a great chest and fumbled among its contents. She drew out a dagger in a leather case, and unsheathed it. The light shone evilly scintillant upon the blade. She laughed, and hid it in the bosom of her gown, and fastened a cloak about her with impatient fingers. Then Matthiette crept down the winding stair that led to the gardens, and unlocked the door at the foot of it.</p>
				<p>A sudden rush of night swept toward her, big with the secrecy of dawn. The sky, washed clean of stars, sprawled above⁠—a leaden, monotonous blank. Many trees whispered thickly over the chaos of earth; to the left, in an increasing dove-colored luminousness, a field of growing maize bristled like the chin of an unshaven Titan.</p>
				<p>Matthiette entered an expectant world. Once in the tree-chequered gardens, it was as though she crept through the aisles of an unlit cathedral already garnished for its sacred pageant. Matthiette heard the querulous birds call sleepily above; the margin of night was thick with their petulant complaints; behind her was the monstrous shadow of the Château d’Arnaye, and past that was a sullen red, the red of contused flesh, to herald dawn. Infinity waited a-tiptoe, tense for the coming miracle, and against this vast repression, her grief dwindled into irrelevancy: the leaves whispered comfort; each tree-bole hid chuckling fauns. Matthiette laughed. Content had flooded the universe all through and through now that yonder, unseen as yet, the scarlet-faced sun was toiling up the rim of the world, and matters, it somehow seemed, could not turn out so very ill, in the end.</p>
				<p>Matthiette came to a hut, from whose open window a faded golden glow spread out into obscurity like a tawdry fan. From without she peered into the hut and saw Raoul. A lamp flickered upon the table. His shadow twitched and wavered about the plastered walls⁠—a portentous mass of head upon a hemisphere of shoulders⁠—as Raoul bent over a chest, sorting the contents, singing softly to himself, while Matthiette leaned upon the sill without, and the gardens of Arnaye took form and stirred in the heart of a chill, steady, sapphire-like radiance.</p>
				<p>Sang Raoul:</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
					<p>
						<span>“Lord, I have worshipped thee ever⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through all these years</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I have served thee, forsaking never</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Light Love that veers</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As a child between laughter and tears.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hast thou no more to afford⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Naught save laughter and tears⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Love, my lord?</span>
						
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“I have borne thy heaviest burden,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor served thee amiss:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now thou hast given a guerdon;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lo, it was this⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A sigh, a shudder, a kiss.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hast thou no more to accord!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I would have more than this,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Love, my lord.</span>
						
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“I am wearied of love that is pastime</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And gifts that it brings;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I entreat of thee, lord, at this last time</span>
						
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Inèffable things.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nay, have proud long-dead kings</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stricken no subtler chord,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whereof the memory clings,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Love, my lord?</span>
						
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“But for a little we live;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Show me thine innermost hoard!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hast thou no more to give,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Love, my lord?”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-6-4" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
					<p epub:type="title">Raymond Psychopompos</p>
				</header>
				<p>Matthiette went to the hut’s door: her hands fell irresolutely upon the rough surface of it and lay still for a moment. Then with the noise of a hoarse groan the door swung inward, and the light guttered in a swirl of keen morning air, casting convulsive shadows upon her lifted countenance, and was extinguished. She held out her arms in a gesture that was half maternal. “Raoul!” she murmured.</p>
				<p>He turned. A sudden bird plunged through the twilight without, with a glad cry that pierced like a knife through the stillness which had fallen in the little room. Raoul de Frison faced her, with clenched hands, silent. For that instant she saw him transfigured.</p>
				<p>But his silence frightened her. There came a piteous catch in her voice. “Fair friend, have you not bidden me⁠—<em>be happy?</em>”</p>
				<p>He sighed. “Mademoiselle,” he said, dully, “I may not avail myself of your tenderness of heart; that you have come to comfort me in my sorrow is a deed at which, I think, God’s holy Angels must rejoice: but I cannot avail myself of it.”</p>
				<p>“Raoul, Raoul,” she said, “do you think that I have come in⁠—pity!”</p>
				<p>“Matthiette,” he returned, “your uncle spoke the truth. I have dreamed dreams concerning you⁠—dreams of a foolish, golden-hearted girl, who would yield⁠—yield gladly⁠—all that the world may give, to be one flesh and soul with me. But I have wakened, dear, to the braver reality⁠—that valorous woman, strong enough to conquer even her own heart that her people may be freed from their peril.”</p>
				<p>“Blind! Blind!” she cried.</p>
				<p>Raoul smiled down upon her. “Mademoiselle,” said he, “I do not doubt that you love me.”</p>
				<p>She went wearily toward the window. “I am not very wise,” Matthiette said, looking out upon the gardens, “and it appears that God has given me an exceedingly tangled matter to unravel. Yet if I decide it wrongly I think the Eternal Father will understand it is because I am not very wise.”</p>
				<p>Matthiette for a moment was silent. Then with averted face she spoke again. “My uncle commands me, with many astute saws and pithy sayings, to wed Monsieur de Puysange. I have not skill to combat him. Many times he has proven it my duty, but he is quick in argument and proves what he will; and I do not think it is my duty. It appears to me a matter wherein man’s wisdom is at variance with God’s will as manifested to us through the holy Evangelists. Assuredly, if I do not wed Monsieur de Puysange there may be war here in our Arnaye, and God has forbidden war; but I may not insure peace in Arnaye without prostituting my body to a man I do not love, and that, too, God has forbidden. I speak somewhat grossly for a maid, but you love me, I think, and will understand. And I, also, love you, Monsieur de Frison. Yet⁠—ah, I am pitiably weak! Love tugs at my heartstrings, bidding me cling to you, and forget these other matters; but I cannot do that, either. I desire very heartily the comfort and splendor and adulation which you cannot give me. I am pitiably weak, Raoul! I cannot come to you with an undivided heart⁠—but my heart, such as it is, I have given you, and today I deliver my honor into your hands and my life’s happiness, to preserve or to destroy. Mother of Christ, grant that I have chosen rightly, for I have chosen now, past retreat! I have chosen you, Raoul, and that love which you elect to give me, and of which I must endeavor to be worthy.”</p>
				<p>Matthiette turned from the window. Now, her bright audacity gone, her ardors chilled, you saw how like a grave, straightforward boy she was, how illimitably tender, how inefficient. “It may be that I have decided wrongly in this tangled matter,” she said now. “And yet I think that God, Who loves us infinitely, cannot be greatly vexed at anything His children do for love of one another.”</p>
				<p>He came toward her. “I bid you go,” he said. “Matthiette, it is my duty to bid you go, and it is your duty to obey.”</p>
				<p>She smiled wistfully through unshed tears. “Man’s wisdom!” said Matthiette. “I think that it is not my duty. And so I disobey you, dear⁠—this once, and no more hereafter.”</p>
				<p>“And yet last night⁠—” Raoul began.</p>
				<p>“Last night,” said she, “I thought that I was strong. I know now it was my vanity that was strong⁠—vanity and pride and fear, Raoul, that for a little mastered me. But in the dawn all things seem very trivial, saving love alone.”</p>
				<p>They looked out into the dew-washed gardens. The daylight was fullgrown, and already the clear-cut forms of men were passing beneath the swaying branches. In the distance a trumpet snarled.</p>
				<p>“Dear love,” said Raoul, “do you not understand that you have brought about my death? For Monsieur de Puysange is at the gates of Arnaye; and either he or Sieur Raymond will have me hanged ere noon.”</p>
				<p>“I do not know,” she said, in a tired voice. “I think that Monsieur de Puysange has some cause to thank me; and my uncle loves me, and his heart, for all his gruffness, is very tender. And⁠—see, Raoul!” She drew the dagger from her bosom. “I shall not survive you a long while, O man of all the world!”</p>
				<p>Perplexed joy flushed through his countenance. “You will do this⁠—for me?” he cried, with a sort of sob. “Matthiette, Matthiette, you shame me!”</p>
				<p>“But I love you,” said Matthiette. “How could it be possible, then, for me to live after you were dead?”</p>
				<p>He bent to her. They kissed.</p>
				<p>Hand in hand they went forth into the daylight. The kindly, familiar place seemed in Matthiette’s eyes oppressed and transformed by the austerity of dawn. It was a clear Sunday morning, at the hightide of summer, and she found the world unutterably Sabbatical; only by a vigorous effort could memory connect it with the normal life of yesterday. The cool edges of the woods, vibrant now with multitudinous shrill pipings, the purple shadows shrinking eastward on the dimpling lawns, the intricate and broken traceries of the dial (where they had met so often), the blurred windings of their path, above which brooded the peaked roofs and gables and slender clerestories of Arnaye, the broad river yonder lapsing through deserted sunlit fields⁠—these things lay before them scarce heeded, stript of all perspective, flat as an open scroll. To them all this was alien. She and Raoul were quite apart from these matters, quite alone, despite the men of Arnaye, hurrying toward the courtyard, who stared at them curiously, but said nothing. A brisk wind was abroad in the treetops, scattering stray leaves, already dead, over the lush grass. Tenderly Raoul brushed a little golden sycamore leaf from the lovelier gold of Matthiette’s hair.</p>
				<p>“I do not know how long I have to live,” he said. “Nobody knows that. But I wish that I might live a great while to serve you worthily.”</p>
				<p>She answered: “Neither in life nor death shall we be parted now. That only matters, my husband.”</p>
				<p>They came into the crowded courtyard just as the drawbridge fell. A troop of horse clattered into Arnaye, and the leader, a young man of frank countenance, dismounted and looked about him inquiringly. Then he came toward them.</p>
				<p>“Monseigneur,” said he, “you see that we ride early in honor of your nuptials.”</p>
				<p>Behind them someone chuckled. “Love one another, young people,” said Sieur Raymond; “but do you, Matthiette, make ready to depart into Normandy as a true and faithful wife to Monsieur de Puysange.”</p>
				<p>She stared into Raoul’s laughing face; there was a kind of anguish in her swift comprehension. Quickly the two men who loved her glanced at each other, half in shame.</p>
				<p>But the Sieur d’Arnaye was not lightly dashed. “Oh, la, la, la!” chuckled the Sieur d’Arnaye, “she would never have given you a second thought, monsieur le vicomte, had I not labelled you forbidden fruit. As it is, my last conspiracy, while a little ruthless, I grant you, turns out admirably. Jack has his Jill, and all ends merrily, like an old song. I will begin on those pigsties the first thing tomorrow morning.”</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
