<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">The Episode Called “Sweet Adelais”</p>
					<p epub:type="subtitle">September 29, 1422</p>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:verse" xml:lang="enm">
					<p>
						<span>“Anoon her herte hath pitee of his wo,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And with that pitee, love com in also;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thus is this quene in pleasaunce and in loye.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<div epub:type="z3998:introductory-note">
				<p>Meanwhile had old Dome Sylvia returned contentedly to the helpmate whom she had accepted under compulsion, and who had made her a fair husband, as husbands go. It is duly recorded, indeed, on their shared tomb, that their forty years of married life were of continuous felicity, and set a pattern to all Norfolk. The more prosaic verbal tradition is that Lady Vernon retained Sir Robert well in hand by pointing out, at judicious intervals, that she had only herself to blame for having married such a selfish person in preference to a hero of the age and an ornament of the loftiest circles.</p>
				<p>I find, on consultation of the Allonby records, that Sylvia Vernon died of a quinsy, in 1419, surviving Sir Robert by some three months. She had borne him four sons and four daughters: of these there remained at Winstead in 1422 only Sir Hugh Vernon, the oldest son, knighted by Henry <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> at Agincourt, where Vernon had fought with distinction; and Adelais Vernon, the youngest daughter, with whom the following has to do.</p>
			</div>
			<section id="chapter-4-1" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
					<p epub:type="title">Gruntings at Aeaea</p>
				</header>
				<p>It was on a clear September day that the Marquis of Falmouth set out for France. John of Bedford had summoned him posthaste when Henry <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> was stricken at Senlis with what bid fair to prove a mortal distemper; for the marquis was Bedford’s comrade-in-arms, veteran of Shrewsbury, Agincourt and other martial disputations, and the Duke-Regent suspected that, to hold France in case of the King’s death, he would presently need all the help he could muster.</p>
				<p>“And I, too, look for warm work,” the marquis conceded to Mistress Adelais Vernon, at parting. “But, God willing, my sweet, we shall be wed at Christmas for all that. The Channel is not very wide. At a pinch I might swim it, I think, to come to you.”</p>
				<p>He kissed her and rode away with his men. Adelais stared after them, striving to picture her betrothed rivalling Leander in this fashion, and subsequently laughed. The marquis was a great lord and a brave captain, but long past his first youth; his actions went somewhat too deliberately ever to be roused to the high lunacies of the Sestian amorist. So Adelais laughed, but a moment later, recollecting the man’s cold desire of her, his iron fervors, Adelais shuddered.</p>
				<p>This was in the courtyard at Winstead. Roger Darke of Yaxham, the girl’s cousin, standing beside her, noted the gesture, and snarled.</p>
				<p>“Think twice of it, Adelais,” said he.</p>
				<p>Whereupon Mistress Vernon flushed like a peony. “I honor him,” she said, with some irrelevance, “and he loves me.”</p>
				<p>Roger scoffed. “Love, love! O you piece of ice! You gray-stone saint! What do you know of love?” Master Darke caught both her hands in his. “Now, by Almighty God, our Saviour and Redeemer, Jesus Christ!” he said, between his teeth, his eyes flaming; “I, Roger Darke, have offered you undefiled love and you have mocked at it. Ha, Tears of Mary! how I love you! And you mean to marry this man for his title! Do you not believe that I love you, Adelais?” he whimpered.</p>
				<p>Gently she disengaged herself. This was of a pattern with Roger’s behavior any time during the past two years. “I suppose you do,” Adelais conceded, with the tiniest possible shrug. “Perhaps that is why I find you so insufferable.”</p>
				<p>Afterward Mistress Vernon turned on her heel and left Master Darke. In his fluent invocation of Mahound and Termagaunt and other overseers of the damned he presently touched upon eloquence.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-2" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
					<p epub:type="title">Comes One with Moly</p>
				</header>
				<p>Adelais came into the walled garden of Winstead, aflame now with autumnal scarlet and gold. She seated herself upon a semicircular marble bench, and laughed for no apparent reason, and contentedly waited what Dame Luck might send.</p>
				<p>She was a comely maid, past argument or (as her lovers habitually complained) any adequate description. Circe, Colchian Medea, Viviane du Lac, were their favorite analogues; and what old romancers had fabled concerning these ladies they took to be the shadow of which Adelais Vernon was the substance. At times these rhapsodists might have supported their contention with a certain speciousness, such as was apparent today, for example, when against the garden’s hurly-burly of color, the prodigal blazes of scarlet and saffron and wine-yellow, the girl’s green gown glowed like an emerald, and her eyes, too, seemed emeralds, vivid, inscrutable, of a clear verdancy that was quite untinged with either blue or gray. Very black lashes shaded them. The long oval of her face (you might have objected), was of an absolute pallor, rarely quickening to a flush; but her petulant lips burned crimson, and her hair mimicked the dwindling radiance of the autumn sunlight and shamed it. All in all, the aspect of Adelais Vernon was, beyond any questioning, spiced with a sorcerous tang; say, the look of a young witch shrewd at love-potions, but ignorant of their flavor; yet before this the girl’s comeliness had stirred men’s hearts to madness, and the county boasted of it.</p>
				<p>Presently Adelais lifted her small imperious head, and then again she smiled, for out of the depths of the garden, with an embellishment of divers trills and roulades, came a man’s voice that carolled blithely.</p>
				<p>Sang the voice:</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
					<p>
						<span>”Had you lived when earth was new</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What had bards of old to do</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Save to sing in praise of you?</span>
						<br/>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Had you lived in ancient days,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Adelais, sweet Adelais,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You had all the ancients’ praise⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You whose beauty would have won</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Canticles of Solomon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had the sage Judean king</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Gazed upon this goodliest thing</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Earth of Heaven’s grace hath got.</span>
						<br/>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Had you gladdened Greece, were not</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All the nymphs of Greece forgot?</span>
						<br/>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Had you trod Sicilian ways,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Adelais, sweet Adelais,</span>
						<br/>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“You had pilfered all their praise:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bion and Theocritus</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had transmitted unto us</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Honeyed harmonies to tell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of your beauty’s miracle,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Delicate, desirable,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And their singing skill were bent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You-ward tenderly⁠—content,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>While the world slipped by, to gaze</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On the grace of you, and praise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sweet Adelais.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Here the song ended, and a man, wheeling about the hedge, paused to regard her with adoring eyes. Adelais looked up at him, incredibly surprised by his coming.</p>
				<p>This was the young Sieur d’Arnaye, Hugh Vernon’s prisoner, taken at Agincourt seven years earlier and held since then, by the King’s command, without ransom; for it was Henry’s policy to release none of the important French prisoners. Even on his deathbed he found time to admonish his brother, John of Bedford, that four of these⁠—Charles d’Orleans and Jehan de Bourbon and Arthur de Rougemont and Fulke d’Arnaye⁠—should never be set at liberty. “Lest,” as the King said, with a savor of prophecy, “more fire be kindled in one day than all your endeavors can quench in three.”</p>
				<p>Presently the Sieur d’Arnaye sighed, rather ostentatiously; and Adelais laughed, and demanded the cause of his grief.</p>
				<p>“Mademoiselle,” he said⁠—his English had but a trace of accent⁠—“I am afflicted with a very grave malady.”</p>
				<p>“What is the name of this malady?” said she.</p>
				<p>“They call it love, mademoiselle.”</p>
				<p>Adelais laughed yet again and doubted if the disease were incurable. But Fulke d’Arnaye seated himself beside her and demonstrated that, in his case, it might not ever be healed.</p>
				<p>“For it is true,” he observed, “that the ancient Scythians, who lived before the moon was made, were wont to cure this distemper by bloodletting under the ears; but your brother, mademoiselle, denies me access to all knives. And the leech Aelian avers that it may be cured by the herb agnea; but your brother, mademoiselle, will not permit that I go into the fields in search of this herb. And in Greece⁠—he, mademoiselle, I might easily be healed of my malady in Greece! For in Greece is the rock, <i xml:lang="el">Leucata Petra</i>, from which a lover may leap and be cured; and the well of the Cyziceni, from which a lover may drink and be cured; and the river Selemnus, in which a lover may bathe and be cured: but your brother will not permit that I go to Greece. You have a very cruel brother, mademoiselle; seven long years, no less, he has penned me here like a starling in a cage.”</p>
				<p>And Fulke d’Arnaye shook his head at her reproachfully.</p>
				<p>Afterward he laughed. Always this Frenchman found something at which to laugh; Adelais could not remember in all the seven years a time when she had seen him downcast. But while his lips jested of his imprisonment, his eyes stared at her mirthlessly, like a dog at his master, and her gaze fell before the candor of the passion she saw in them.</p>
				<p>“My lord,” said Adelais, “why will you not give your parole? Then you would be free to come and go as you elected.” A little she bent toward him, a covert red showing in her cheeks. “Tonight at Halvergate the Earl of Brudenel holds the feast of Saint Michael. Give your parole, my lord, and come with us. There will be in our company fair ladies who may perhaps heal your malady.”</p>
				<p>But the Sieur d’Arnaye only laughed. “I cannot give my parole,” he said, “since I mean to escape for all your brother’s care.” Then he fell to pacing up and down before her. “Now, by Monseigneur Saint Médard and the Eagle that sheltered him!” he cried, in half-humorous self-mockery; “however thickly troubles rain upon me, I think that I shall never give up hoping!” After a pause, “Listen, mademoiselle,” he went on, more gravely, and gave a nervous gesture toward the east, “yonder is France, sacked, pillaged, ruinous, prostrate, naked to her enemy. But at Vincennes, men say, the butcher of Agincourt is dying. With him dies the English power in France. Can his son hold that dear realm? Are those tiny hands with which this child may not yet feed himself capable to wield a sceptre? Can he who is yet beholden to nurses for milk distribute sustenance to the law and justice of a nation? He, I think not, mademoiselle! France will have need of me shortly. Therefore, I cannot give my parole.”</p>
				<p>“Then must my brother still lose his sleep, lord, for always your safekeeping is in his mind. Today at cockcrow he set out for the coast to examine those Frenchmen who landed yesterday.”</p>
				<p>At this he wheeled about. “Frenchmen!”</p>
				<p>“Only Norman fishermen, lord, whom the storm drove to seek shelter in England. But he feared they had come to rescue you.”</p>
				<p>Fulke d’Arnaye shrugged his shoulders. “That was my thought, too,” he admitted, with a laugh. “Always I dream of escape, mademoiselle. Have a care of me, sweet enemy! I shall escape yet, it may be.”</p>
				<p>“But I will not have you escape,” said Adelais. She tossed her glittering little head. “Winstead would not be Winstead without you. Why, I was but a child, my lord, when you came. Have you forgotten, then, the lank, awkward child who used to stare at you so gravely?”</p>
				<p>“Mademoiselle,” he returned, and now his voice trembled and still the hunger in his eyes grew more great, “I think that in all these years I have forgotten nothing⁠—not even the most trivial happening, mademoiselle⁠—wherein you had a part. You were a very beautiful child. Look you, I remember as if it were yesterday that you never wept when your good lady mother⁠—whose soul may Christ have in his keeping!⁠—was forced to punish you for some little misdeed. No, you never wept; but your eyes would grow wistful, and you would come to me here in the garden, and sit with me for a long time in silence. ‘Fulke,’ you would say, quite suddenly, ‘I love you better than my mother.’ And I told you that it was wrong to make such observations, did I not, mademoiselle? My faith, yes! but I may confess now that I liked it,” Fulke d’Arnaye ended, with a faint chuckle.</p>
				<p>Adelais sat motionless. Certainly it was strange, she thought, how the sound of this man’s voice had power to move her. Certainly, too, this man was very foolish.</p>
				<p>“And now the child is a woman⁠—a woman who will presently be Marchioness of Falmouth. Look you, when I get free of my prison⁠—and I shall get free, never fear, mademoiselle⁠—I shall often think of that great lady. For only God can curb a man’s dreams, and God is compassionate. So I hope to dream nightly of a gracious lady whose hair is gold and whose eyes are colored like the summer sea and whose voice is clear and low and very wonderfully sweet. Nightly, I think, the vision of that dear enemy will hearten me to fight for France by day. In effect, mademoiselle, your traitor beauty will yet aid me to destroy your country.”</p>
				<p>The Sieur d’Arnaye laughed, somewhat cheerlessly, as he lifted her hand to his lips.</p>
				<p>And certainly also (she concluded her reflections) it was absurd how this man’s touch seemed an alarm to her pulses. Adelais drew away from him.</p>
				<p>“No!” she said: “remember, lord, I, too, am not free.”</p>
				<p>“Indeed, we tread on dangerous ground,” the Frenchman assented, with a sad little smile. “Pardon me, mademoiselle. Even were you free of your trothplight⁠—even were I free of my prison, most beautiful lady, I have naught to offer you yonder in that fair land of France. They tell me that the owl and the wolf hunt undisturbed where Arnaye once stood. My château is carpeted with furze and roofed with God’s Heaven. That gives me a large estate⁠—does it not?⁠—but I may not reasonably ask a woman to share it. So I pray you pardon me for my nonsense, mademoiselle, and I pray that the Marchioness of Falmouth may be very happy.”</p>
				<p>And with that he vanished into the autumn-fired recesses of the garden, singing, his head borne stiff. Oh, the brave man who esteemed misfortune so slightly! thought Adelais. She remembered that the Marquis of Falmouth rarely smiled; and once only⁠—at a bull-baiting⁠—had she heard him laugh. It needed bloodshed, then, to amuse him, Adelais deduced, with that self-certainty in logic which is proper to youth; and the girl shuddered.</p>
				<p>But through the scarlet coppices of the garden, growing fainter and yet more faint, rang the singing of Fulke d’Arnaye.</p>
				<p>Sang the Frenchman:</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
					<p>
						<span>“Had you lived in Roman times</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No Catullus in his rhymes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had lamented Lesbia’s sparrow:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He had praised your forehead, narrow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As the newly-crescent moon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>White as apple-trees in June;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He had made some amorous tune</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of the laughing light Eros</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Snared as Psyche-ward he goes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By your beauty⁠—by your slim,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>White, perfect beauty.</span>
						<br/>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“After him</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Horace, finding in your eyes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Horace limned in lustrous wise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Would have made you melodies</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fittingly to hymn your praise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sweet Adelais.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-3" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
					<p epub:type="title">Roger is Explicit</p>
				</header>
				<p>Into the midst of the Michaelmas festivities at Halvergate that night, burst a mud-splattered fellow in search of Sir Hugh Vernon. Roger Darke brought him to the knight. The fellow then related that he came from Simeon de Beck, the master of Castle Rising, with tidings that a strange boat, French-rigged, was hovering about the north coast. Let Sir Hugh have a care of his prisoner.</p>
				<p>Vernon swore roundly. “I must look into this,” he said. “But what shall I do with Adelais?”</p>
				<p>“Will you not trust her to me?” Roger asked. “If so, cousin, I will very gladly be her escort to Winstead. Let the girl dance her fill while she may, Hugh. She will have little heart for dancing after a month or so of Falmouth’s company.”</p>
				<p>“That is true,” Vernon assented; “but the match is a good one, and she is bent upon it.”</p>
				<p>So presently he rode with his men to the north coast. An hour later Roger Darke and Adelais set out for Winstead, in spite of all Lady Brudenel’s protestations that Mistress Vernon had best lie with her that night at Halvergate.</p>
				<p>It was a clear night of restless winds, neither warm nor chill, but fine September weather. About them the air was heavy with the damp odors of decaying leaves, for the road they followed was shut in by the autumn woods, that now arched the way with sere foliage, rustling and whirring and thinly complaining overhead, and now left it open to broad splashes of moonlight, where fallen leaves scuttled about in the wind vortices. Adelais, elate with dancing, chattered of this and that as her gray mare ambled homeward, but Roger was moody.</p>
				<p>Past Upton the road branched in three directions; here Master Darke caught the gray mare’s bridle and turned both horses to the left.</p>
				<p>“Why, of whatever are you thinking!” the girl derided him. “Roger, this is not the road to Winstead!”</p>
				<p>He grinned evilly over his shoulder. “It is the road to Yaxham, Adelais, where my chaplain expects us.”</p>
				<p>In a flash she saw it all as her eyes swept these desolate woods. “You will not dare!”</p>
				<p>“Will I not?” said Roger. “Faith, for my part, I think you have mocked me for the last time, Adelais, since it is the wife’s duty, as Paul very justly says, to obey.”</p>
				<p>Swiftly she slipped from the mare. But he followed her. “Oh, infamy!” the girl cried. “You have planned this, you coward!”</p>
				<p>“Yes, I planned it,” said Roger Darke. “Yet I take no great credit therefor, for it was simple enough. I had but to send a feigned message to your blockhead brother. Ha, yes, I planned it, Adelais, and I planned it well. But I deal honorably. Tomorrow you will be Mistress Darke, never fear.”</p>
				<p>He grasped at her cloak as she shrank from him. The garment fell, leaving the girl momentarily free, her festival jewels shimmering in the moonlight, her bared shoulders glistening like silver. Darke, staring at her, giggled horribly. An instant later Adelais fell upon her knees.</p>
				<p>“Sweet Christ, have pity upon Thy handmaiden! Do not forsake me, sweet Christ, in my extremity! Save me from this man!” she prayed, with entire faith.</p>
				<p>“My lady wife,” said Darke, and his hot, wet hand sank heavily upon her shoulder, “you had best finish your prayer before my chaplain, I think, since by ordinary Holy Church is skilled to comfort the sorrowing.”</p>
				<p>“A miracle, dear lord Christ!” the girl wailed. “O sweet Christ, a miracle!”</p>
				<p>“Faith of God!” said Roger, in a flattish tone; “what was that?”</p>
				<p>For faintly there came the sound of one singing.</p>
				<p>Sang the distant voice:</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
					<p>
						<span>”Had your father’s household been</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Guelfic-born or Ghibelline,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beatrice were unknown</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On her star-encompassed throne.</span>
						<br/>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“For, had Dante viewed your grace,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Adelais, sweet Adelais,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You had reigned in Bice’s place⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had for candles, Hyades,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rastaben, and Betelguese⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And had heard Zachariel</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Chaunt of you, and, chaunting, tell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All the grace of you, and praise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sweet Adelais.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-4" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
					<p epub:type="title">Honor Brings a Padlock</p>
				</header>
				<p>Adelais sprang to her feet. “A miracle!” she cried, her voice shaking. “Fulke, Fulke! to me, Fulke!”</p>
				<p>Master Darke hurried her struggling toward his horse. Darke was muttering curses, for there was now a beat of hoofs in the road yonder that led to Winstead. “Fulke, Fulke!” the girl shrieked.</p>
				<p>Then presently, as Roger put foot to stirrup, two horsemen wheeled about the bend in the road, and one of them leapt to the ground.</p>
				<p>“Mademoiselle,” said Fulke d’Arnaye, “am I, indeed, so fortunate as to be of any service to you?”</p>
				<p>“Ho!” cried Roger, with a gulp of relief, “it is only the French dancing-master taking French leave of poor cousin Hugh! Man, but you startled me!”</p>
				<p>Now Adelais ran to the Frenchman, clinging to him the while that she told of Roger’s tricks. And d’Arnaye’s face set mask-like.</p>
				<p>“Monsieur,” he said, when she had ended, “you have wronged a sweet and innocent lady. As God lives, you shall answer to me for this.”</p>
				<p>“Look you,” Roger pointed out, “this is none of your affair, Monsieur Jackanapes. You are bound for the coast, I take it. Very well⁠—ka me, and I ka thee. Do you go your way in peace, and let us do the same.”</p>
				<p>Fulke d’Arnaye put the girl aside and spoke rapidly in French to his companion. Then with mincing agility he stepped toward Master Darke.</p>
				<p>Roger blustered. “You hop-toad! you jumping-jack!” said he, “what do you mean?”</p>
				<p>“Chastisement!” said the Frenchman, and struck him in the face.</p>
				<p>“Very well!” said Master Darke, strangely quiet. And with that they both drew.</p>
				<p>The Frenchman laughed, high and shrill, as they closed, and afterward he began to pour forth a voluble flow of discourse. Battle was wine to the man.</p>
				<p>“Not since Agincourt, Master Coward⁠—he, no!⁠—have I held sword in hand. It is a good sword, this⁠—a sharp sword, is it not? Ah, the poor arm⁠—but see, your blood is quite black-looking in this moonlight, and I had thought cowards yielded a paler blood than brave men possess. We live and learn, is it not? Observe, I play with you like a child⁠—as I played with your tall King at Agincourt when I cut away the coronet from his helmet. I did not kill him⁠—no!⁠—but I wounded him, you conceive? Presently, I shall wound you, too. My compliments⁠—you have grazed my hand. But I shall not kill you, because you are the kinsman of the fairest lady earth may boast, and I would not willingly shed the least drop of any blood that is partly hers. <i xml:lang="fr">Ohé</i>, no! Yet since I needs must do this ungallant thing⁠—why, see, monsieur, how easy it is!”</p>
				<p>Thereupon he cut Roger down at a blow and composedly set to wiping his sword on the grass. The Englishman lay like a log where he had fallen.</p>
				<p>“Lord,” Adelais quavered, “lord, have you killed him?”</p>
				<p>Fulke d’Arnaye sighed. “<i xml:lang="fr">Hélas</i>, no!” said he, “since I knew that you did not wish it. See, mademoiselle⁠—I have but made a healthful and bloodletting small hole in him here. He will return himself to survive to it long time⁠—Fie, but my English fails me, after these so many years⁠—”</p>
				<p>D’Arnaye stood for a moment as if in thought, concluding his meditations with a grimace. After that he began again to speak in French to his companion. The debate seemed vital. The stranger gesticulated, pleaded, swore, implored, summoned all inventions between the starry spheres and the mud of Cocytus to judge of the affair; but Fulke d’Arnaye was resolute.</p>
				<p>“Behold, mademoiselle,” he said, at length, “how my poor Olivier excites himself over a little matter. Olivier is my brother, most beautiful lady, but he speaks no English, so that I cannot present him to you. He came to rescue me, this poor Olivier, you conceive. Those Norman fishermen of whom you spoke today⁠—but you English are blinded, I think, by the fogs of your cold island. Eight of the bravest gentlemen in France, mademoiselle, were those same fishermen, come to bribe my gaoler⁠—the incorruptible Tompkins, no less. Hé, yes, they came to tell me that Henry of Monmouth, by the wrath of God King of France, is dead at Vincennes yonder, mademoiselle, and that France will soon be free of you English. France rises in her might⁠—” His nostrils dilated, he seemed taller; then he shrugged. “And poor Olivier grieves that I may not strike a blow for her⁠—grieves that I must go back to Winstead.”</p>
				<p>D’Arnaye laughed as he caught the bridle of the gray mare and turned her so that Adelais might mount. But the girl, with a faint, wondering cry, drew away from him.</p>
				<p>“You will go back! You have escaped, lord, and you will go back!”</p>
				<p>“Why, look you,” said the Frenchman, “what else may I conceivably do? We are some miles from your home, most beautiful lady⁠—can you ride those four long miles alone? in this night so dangerous? Can I leave you here alone in this so tall forest? Hé, surely not. I am desolated, mademoiselle, but I needs must burden you with my company homeward.”</p>
				<p>Adelais drew a choking breath. He had fretted out seven years of captivity. Now he was free; and lest she be harmed or her name be smutched, however faintly, he would go back to his prison, jesting. “No, no!” she cried aloud.</p>
				<p>But he raised a deprecating hand. “You cannot go alone. Olivier here would go with you gladly. Not one of those brave gentlemen who await me at the coast yonder but would go with you very, very gladly, for they love France, these brave gentlemen, and they think that I can serve her better than most other men. That is very flattering, is it not? But all the world conspires to flatter me, mademoiselle. Your good brother, by example, prizes my company so highly that he would infallibly hang the gentleman who rode back with you. So, you conceive, I cannot avail myself of their services. But with me it is different, <i xml:lang="fr">hein</i>? Ah, yes, Sir Hugh will merely lock me up again and for the future guard me more vigilantly. Will you not mount, mademoiselle?”</p>
				<p>His voice was quiet, and his smile never failed him. It was this steady smile which set her heart to aching. Adelais knew that no natural power could dissuade him; he would go back with her; but she knew how constantly he had hoped for liberty, with what fortitude he had awaited his chance of liberty; and that he should return to captivity, smiling, thrilled her to impotent, heart-shaking rage. It maddened her that he dared love her thus infinitely.</p>
				<p>“But, mademoiselle,” Fulke d’Arnaye went on, when she had mounted, “let us proceed, if it so please you, by way of Filby. For then we may ride a little distance with this rogue Olivier. I may not hope to see Olivier again in this life, you comprehend, and Olivier is, I think, the one person who loves me in all this great wide world. Me, I am not very popular, you conceive. But you do not object, mademoiselle?”</p>
				<p>“No!” she said, in a stifled voice.</p>
				<p>Afterward they rode on the way to Filby, leaving Roger Darke to regain at discretion the mastership of his faculties. The two Frenchmen as they went talked vehemently; and Adelais, following them, brooded on the powerful Marquis of Falmouth and the great lady she would shortly be; but her eyes strained after Fulke d’Arnaye.</p>
				<p>Presently he fell a-singing; and still his singing praised her in a desirous song, yearning but very sweet, as they rode through the autumn woods; and his voice quickened her pulses as always it had the power to quicken them, and in her soul an interminable battling dragged on.</p>
				<p>Sang Fulke d’Arnaye:</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
					<p>
						<span>”Had you lived when earth was new</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What had bards of old to do</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Save to sing in praise of you?</span>
						<br/>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“They had sung of you always,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Adelais, sweet Adelais,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As worthiest of all men’s praise;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor had undying melodies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wailed soft as love may sing of these</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dream-hallowed names⁠—of Héloïse,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ysoude, Salomê, Semelê,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Morgaine, Lucrece, Antiopê,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Brunhilda, Helen, Mélusine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Penelope, and Magdalene:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>—But you alone had all men’s praise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sweet Adelais”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-5" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
					<p epub:type="title">“Thalatta!”</p>
				</header>
				<p>When they had crossed the Bure, they had come into the open country⁠—a great plain, gray in the moonlight, that descended, hillock by hillock, toward the shores of the North Sea. On the right the dimpling lustre of tumbling waters stretched to a dubious skyline, unbroken save for the sail of the French boat, moored near the ruins of the old Roman station, Garianonum, and showing white against the unresting sea, like a naked arm; to the left the lights of Filby flashed their unblinking, cordial radiance.</p>
				<p>Here the brothers parted. Vainly Olivier wept and stormed before Fulke’s unwavering smile; the Sieur d’Arnaye was adamantean: and presently the younger man kissed him on both cheeks and rode slowly away toward the sea.</p>
				<p>D’Arnaye stared after him. “Ah, the brave lad!” said Fulke d’Arnaye. “And yet how foolish! Look you, mademoiselle, that rogue is worth ten of me, and he does not even suspect it.”</p>
				<p>His composure stung her to madness.</p>
				<p>“Now, by the passion of our Lord and Saviour!” Adelais cried, wringing her hands in impotence; “I conjure you to hear me, Fulke! You must not do this thing. Oh, you are cruel, cruel! Listen, my lord,” she went on with more restraint, when she had reined up her horse by the side of his, “yonder in France the world lies at your feet. Our great King is dead. France rises now, and France needs a brave captain. You, you! it is you that she needs. She has sent for you, my lord, that mother France whom you love. And you will go back to sleep in the sun at Winstead when France has need of you. Oh, it is foul!”</p>
				<p>But he shook his head. “France is very dear to me,” he said, “yet there are other men who can serve France. And there is no man save me who may tonight serve you, most beautiful lady.”</p>
				<p>“You shame me!” she cried, in a gust of passion. “You shame my worthlessness with this mad honor of yours that drags you jesting to your death! For you must die a prisoner now, without any hope. You and Orleans and Bourbon are England’s only hold on France, and Bedford dare not let you go. Fetters, chains, dungeons, death, torture perhaps⁠—that is what you must look for now. And you will no longer be held at Winstead, but in the strong Tower at London.”</p>
				<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Hélas</i>, you speak more truly than an oracle,” he gayly assented.</p>
				<p>And hers was the ageless thought of women. “This man is rather foolish and peculiarly dear to me. What shall I do with him? and how much must I humor him in his foolishness?”</p>
				<p>D’Arnaye stayed motionless: but still his eyes strained after Olivier.</p>
				<p>Well, she would humor him. There was no alternative save that of perhaps never seeing Fulke again.</p>
				<p>Adelais laid her hand upon his arm. “You love me. God knows, I am not worthy of it, but you love me. Ever since I was a child you have loved me⁠—always, always it was you who indulged me, shielded me, protected me with this fond constancy that I have not merited. Very well,”⁠—she paused, for a single heartbeat⁠—“go! and take me with you.”</p>
				<p>The hand he raised shook as though palsied. “O most beautiful!” the Frenchman cried, in an extreme of adoration; “you would do that! You would do that in pity to save me⁠—unworthy me! And it is I whom you call brave⁠—me, who annoy you with my woes so petty!” Fulke d’Arnaye slipped from his horse, and presently stood beside the gray mare, holding a small, slim hand in his. “I thank you,” he said, simply. “You know that it is impossible. But yes, I have loved you these long years. And now⁠—Ah, my heart shakes, my words tumble, I cannot speak! You know that I may not⁠—may not let you do this thing. Why, but even if, of your prodigal graciousness, mademoiselle, you were so foolish as to waste a little liking upon my so many demerits⁠—” He gave a hopeless gesture. “Why, there is always our brave marquis to be considered, who will so soon make you a powerful, rich lady. And I?⁠—I have nothing.”</p>
				<p>But Adelais had rested either hand upon a stalwart shoulder, bending down to him till her hair brushed his. Yes, this man was peculiarly dear to her: she could not bear to have him murdered when in equity he deserved only to have his jaws boxed for his toplofty nonsense about her; and, after all, she did not much mind humoring him in his foolishness.</p>
				<p>“Do you not understand?” she whispered. “Ah, my paladin, do you think I speak in pity? I wished to be a great lady⁠—yes. Yet always, I think, I loved you, Fulke, but until tonight I had believed that love was only the man’s folly, the woman’s diversion. See, here is Falmouth’s ring.” She drew it from her finger, and flung it awkwardly, as every woman throws. Through the moonlight it fell glistening. “Yes, I hungered for Falmouth’s power, but you have shown me that which is above any temporal power. Ever I must crave the highest, Fulke⁠—Ah, fair sweet friend, do not deny me!” Adelais cried, piteously. “Take me with you, Fulke! I will ride with you to the wars, my lord, as your page; I will be your wife, your slave, your scullion. I will do anything save leave you. Lord, it is not the maid’s part to plead thus!”</p>
				<p>Fulke d’Arnaye drew her warm, yielding body toward him and stood in silence. Then he raised his eyes to heaven. “Dear Lord God,” he cried, in a great voice, “I entreat of Thee that if through my fault this woman ever know regret or sorrow I be cast into the nethermost pit of Hell for all eternity!” Afterward he kissed her.</p>
				<p>And presently Adelais lifted her head, with a mocking little laugh. “Sorrow!” she echoed. “I think there is no sorrow in all the world. Mount, my lord, mount! See where brother Olivier waits for us yonder.”</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
