<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>The Epistle Dedicatory</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="dedication-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">The Epistle Dedicatory</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:verse" xml:lang="enm">
					<p>
						<span>“In elect utteraunce to make memoriall,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To thee for souccour, to thee for helpe I call,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mine homely rudeness and dryghness to expell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With the freshe waters of Elyconys well.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<div>
				<p><b>My Dear <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Grundy</b>: You may have observed that nowadays we rank the love-story among the comfits of literature; and we do this for the excellent reason that man is a thinking animal by courtesy rather than usage.</p>
				<p>Rightly considered, the most trivial love-affair is of staggering import. Who are we to question this, when nine-tenths of us owe our existence to a summer flirtation? And while our graver economic and social and psychic “problems” (to settle some one of which is nowadays the object of all ponderable fiction) are doubtless worthy of most serious consideration, you will find, my dear madam, that frivolous love-affairs, little and big, were shaping history and playing spillikins with sceptres long before any of these delectable matters were thought of.</p>
				<p>Yes, even the most talked-about “questions of the day” are sometimes worthy of consideration; but were it not for the kisses of remote years and the high gropings of hearts no longer animate, there would be none to accord them this same consideration, and a void world would teeter about the sun, silent and naked as an orange. Love is an illusion, if you will; but always through this illusion, alone, has the next generation been rendered possible, and all endearing human idiocies, including “questions of the day,” have been maintained.</p>
				<p>Love, then, is no trifle. And literature, mimicking life at a respectful distance, may very reasonably be permitted an occasional reference to the cornerstone of all that exists. For in life “a trivial little love-story” is a matter more frequently aspersed than found. Viewed in the light of its consequences, any love-affair is of gigantic signification, inasmuch as the most trivial is a part of Nature’s unending and, some say, her only labor, toward the peopling of the worlds.</p>
				<p>She is uninventive, if you will, this Nature, but she is tireless. Generation by generation she brings it about that for a period weak men may stalk as demigods, while to every woman is granted at least one hour wherein to spurn the earth, a warm, breathing angel. Generation by generation does Nature thus betrick humanity, that humanity may endure.</p>
				<p>Here for a little⁠—with the gracious connivance of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. E.</abbr> Townsend, to whom all lyrics hereinafter should be accredited⁠—I have followed Nature, the arch-trickster. Through her monstrous tapestry I have traced out for you the windings of a single thread. It is parti-colored, this thread⁠—now black for a mourning sign, and now scarlet where blood has stained it, and now brilliancy itself⁠—for the tinsel of young love (if, as wise men tell us, it be but tinsel), at least makes a prodigiously fine appearance until time tarnish it. I entreat you, dear lady, to accept this traced-out thread with assurances of my most distinguished regard.</p>
				<p>The gift is not great. Hereinafter is recorded nothing more weighty than the follies of young persons, perpetrated in a lost world which when compared with your ladyship’s present planet seems rather callow. Hereinafter are only love-stories, and nowadays nobody takes lovemaking very seriously.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>And truly, my dear madam, I dare say the Pompeiians did not take Vesuvius very seriously; it was merely an eligible spot for a <i xml:lang="fr">fête champêtre</i>. And when gaunt fishermen first preached Christ about the highways, depend upon it, that was not taken very seriously, either. <i xml:lang="la">Credat Judaeus</i>; but all sensible folk⁠—such as you and I, my dear madam⁠—passed on with a tolerant shrug, knowing “their doctrine could be held of no sane man.”</p>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
